# Masters_Project_UiO

This thesis work is focused to study the collectivity of the odd-even 77,79 Zn nuclei via intermediate-energy Coulomb excitation. 77,79 Zn, having 30 protons and 47 and 49 neutrons, will help understand both shell evolution and collective properties near 78 Ni. The experiment subject to the thesis was conducted in April 2015 at the Radioactive Ion Beam Factory (RIBF), RIKEN Nishina Center, Japan. The beams of radioactive nuclei near 78 Ni, including the
77,79 Zn isotopes were produced by the in-flight fission of a primary beam of 238 U at 345 MeV/u bombarding a 3 mm thick 9 Be target. These exotic Zn isotopes to be investigated were separated, selected, and identified using the BigRIPS in-flight fragment separator. The identified particles were further transported to the focal point, F8, where they impinged on a reaction target of 197 Au at 948 mg/cm 2 thickness. The DALI2 γ-ray spectrometer, which is
an array formed by 186 NaI(Tl) detector, surrounding the reaction target, was used to detect the γ-rays emitted by the decay of the excited states of 77,79 Zn. Finally, the reaction products exited the target and were identified by the ZeroDegree spectrometer. In order to deduce the contribution from the nuclear interaction on the γ-ray yield observed for 77,79 Zn, another set of data was taken using the reaction target of 12 C (903 mg/cm 2 thick) during the experiment.

Using the Doppler-corrected γ-ray spectra for 79 Zn, a new transition at 1260 keV has been observed in the present experiment. The tentative spin assignment and origin of this newly identified collective state will be discussed in this thesis. The γ-ray spectrum obtained for 77 Zn shows rather scattered structure with several transitions. This can be related to a different excitation mechanism which will be further discussed in the present thesis.
